In this course we're covering
the fat file system,
in this module we're going to
look at fat file recovery.
We're going to talk about the steps to
recover a file in the fat file system.
The first step recovering a file and
the fat file system is we need to change
the first bite in the directory sets from
A Hexi five to a different character.
If we know the first letter of the file,
if the file has a long file name you
can get the first letter from that.
If it only has a short file name entry,
we will change that back
to another character.
Any keyboard character will work.
The next thing we need to do is we name
to change the values in the fat table to
indicate that the clusters are allocated
from the short file name entry.
We will be able to get the starting
cluster and the file size so
we'll know which file injury and
the fat table.
We need to change to indicate
that it's allocated.
And we'll know if we need to put an end of
file marker there or if the file takes up
more than one cluster we would need to
put a pointer to that next cluster.
So we will determine the cluster
size from the volume boot record.
Then we will calculate
the number of clusters needed.
Once we find out how
many clusters we need for
our file we will divide the file size
by the cluster sides and round up.
That's how we're going to determine
how many clusters we need and
once we determine that we can reach ain't
our entries in the fat table and then
we will have successfully recovered our
file some issues with fat file recovery.
Well if we have fragmented
files it's going to be harder
to recover them because if
they are not contiguous it's
going to be very hard to tell where
that file was in the fat table.
Another issue is if the directory
entry was reused or overwritten and
we don't have that short file in that
directory entry to find our starting
cluster and file size.
That will make it very
difficult to recover the file.
And the other issue we come
across is if the data has
been overridden out on the disk.
So let's start our walk through.
We're actually going to recover
some files from our NPR Bhd.
So we're going to need our NPR Bhd.
We're going to need our
Windows Explorer and
we're going to need active disk editor.
So let's start our walk through.
Okay, so let's begin or walk through.
The first thing we need to do
is we have to go attach RVHD.
So we're going to bring up dis management,
we're going to go to actions,
attach a VHD, you're going to navigate out
to where the VHD is saved on your drive.
You're going to select it and
then we're going to click open,
once RVHD attach is for this walkthrough.
We're going to be using
the fat 32100 megabyte volume.
That should be the first
volume on your disk.
Note the dis number in the drive letter
for that fat 32100 megabit volume.
I want you to open up
the volume in Windows Explorer.
We're going to create a file.
We're going to create
a folder on the volume.
So new folder, we're going to
call this new folder root, and
I'm doing this because we're putting it in
the root of the volume in the root folder.
We're also going to create a file.
I'm going to use a text document and I'm
just going to call this file in root and
now I'm going to open the file and
write some data on it.
Once you put some data on there,
save the file you can close it.
I'm also going to create another
folder in this directory.
So new folder and I'm just going
to call this folder inroot and
these will have long file
name entries as we can see.
And in this folder I'm going to
put another new text document.
I'm just going to call it dark in
child and I'm going to open it up and
write some data on there and
I'm going to save it and
we're going to close it
now once we've done that,
I'm going to go ahead and
minimize file Explorer and
I'm going to open up
active disk editor now.
Once active disk editor opens,
we want to go ahead and select our volume.
Remember we want that 100
megabyte fat 32 volume which
should be the first volume
on the virtual hard drive.
You just mounted the NBRVHD.
So I'm going to click open disk and
now I'm going to go to volumes.
Now Mayan was drive letter A,
yours might be different.
So once you've located your
fat volume go ahead and
right click and open in disk editor.
Once your volume opens we can see we
are again in the volume boot record.
So let's take a look here and
find out how many sectors per
cluster we have on this volume.
Remember we have our bytes per sector.
Right here in x it's zero B.
For a length of two bites.
So it's going to be zero B and zero C.
And then at 0D we have
sectors per cluster.
And in this volume we have
two sectors per cluster.
So 10:24 bytes per cluster.
So now I want to navigate
to my root directory so
we can go ahead and click on navigate.
We're going to navigate
to the root directory.
We're going to change our
template to fat directory entry.
We can see we have a new
entry in here called root.
This is that folder we just created
at the root of the volume and
I want to take a quick look at this.
So we're going here right
at the beginning of the.
Short file name entry for
root should be right here,
we're going to right click
set template position.
Now, I want to show you something about a
directory entry that's a little different
and a regular file.
We're going to have the file name which is
going to be root because it's a directory,
there are no extension,
there's no extension on a directory.
So we have dot dot dot which is
represented by hexidecimal 2 0 2 0 2 0.
And we have our attribute,
which we could see is 1 0,
so if we go ahead into our templates and
we expand attributes.
We can see that this is a directory,
now remember this is a packed bite and
we could break this out
into binary by hand.
And see which bit was turned on but
that's how we tell what the attribute
is and in this case it is a directory.
We still have the reserved,
we still have our creation
millisecond offset time,
we still have creation date and time.
We still have last access date, no time.
First cluster high word
is empty in this case, so
there is no high word and then I
would have my modified date and time.
And then I would have my
starting cluster lowered
right here and
we can see this is cluster 8.
Now, if we remember from our last module,
there was a file in cluster
8 before we wrote a file.
And it was located In cluster 8, so
this file has been overwritten
by this directory.
And we can see the file size is 0,
the file size will always be 0 for
a directory, I want you to know the file
size will always be 0 for a directory.
Now we're going to go ahead and
look at cluster 8 so,
we're going to, go to go to sector and
we're going to navigate in hex again.
0x 08, we're going to say, okay and
we can see that our file that previously
occupied this space has now this
cluster has now been overwritten.
But one thing I want you to know about a
directory is when you look at a directory.
The first entry, the very top right here,
is going to be a dot and
then the next entry will be a double dot.
The first entry right here,
this dot entry,
it's red the same way we would read
an entry in the root directory.
So, we're going to go ahead and
set template position but
this dot entry points to itself.
What I mean by that is if you
look at the starting cluster,
it's going to say cluster 8,
which we are in cluster 8.
So, this first entry is
going to point to itself,
it's saying this is me and cluster 8.
It will have times,
it will have an attribute which
indicates it's a directory.
It'll still have
the millisecond offset time for
file creation, last access date,
only modified date and
time, starting cluster
low word in its file size will still be 0.
The entry below this,
we're going to set template position,
I'm going to look at this this century
points to the parent of this directory.
In this case the parent is the root
directory so, you're always going to
see 0 0, if the parent is the directory
right here for the first cluster.
It will tell you the information
about the parent,
this is the parent's millisecond,
offset creation, date and
time, last access date.
Last modified date and time and
if you see 0 0, you know,
you need to go to the root directory
to find the parent of this directory.
That we're in right now in cluster 8,
it will also list the files that
were created in the directory.
And we created a file and a folder and
they show up in our directory,
now let's go back to the root directory,
so we'll go to navigate directory.
And we can see our document is deleted.
We're going to set template manager.
We see, it's still telling us
the first cluster is cluster 8,
this would be one of those
limitations in the fact file system.
Because we know cluster 8
is now occupied by root.
We just went and looked at it and
if we look at the facts
would also see the cluster 8
is occupied,
marked as allocated being used.
So this is what would happen when a file
gets overwritten in the fact file system.
Let's create a new document
in the root of the directory,
so let's bring up our File Explorer.
We're going to go to the root
of the directory and
we're going to create a new file.
I'm going to create
a new text document and
I'm going to call it to delete me.
I'm going to open it up and
put some data on it.
Doesn't matter what you write,
I just wrote this is a doc,
I will delete and
I'm going to go ahead and
save this file and close it now.
I'm going to minimize this,
I'm going to reload my drive and
active disk editor Right
click on the volume,
open in this editor again
we open at the volume
boot record but
we've already looked at this and
we know we have two sectors per cluster.
So I'm going to use navigate and
I'm going to go to my room directory,
I'm going to change my template
view too root directory,
fat directory entry and we can see our
file that we just created to leave me.
So I'm going to set my template
position what's one down?
I'm going to set my template position,
I can see the starting
cluster Is close to 12 so
first cluster cluster 12 and above it you
can see we have the long
file name entries.
We have a 01 and a 42 so
we have to long file name
entries above my short file name alias for
delete me.
Check our cluster high word just to make
sure we have no cluster high word so we
know that are starting cluster is going to
be cluster 12 or heck suggestible Zero C.
So I'm going to go ahead and get again,
go to navigate, go to sector and
I'm going to say zero X to signify hex and
then I'm going to say zero C.
I'm going to say okay and
we can see the data is written out on
the cluster We're in cluster 12.
No, I want to take a look
at the fat table So
again I'm going to use going to
navigate and the menu of the Fat one.
I'm going to go to file
preferences to change my view And
I'm going to have four bytes per line.
Change bytes per aligned to
four I'm going to click OK now
what I want to do Is look at the entry for
cluster 12.
So we talked about our first
entry is the media descriptor
this is our the next entries
are fat file type indicator And
then the 3rd entry represents cluster too,
so this is cluster too.
Next entry represent cluster 3,
the next entry,
cluster 4, cluster five,
cluster 6, cluster seven,
cluster 8 cluster 9,
cluster 10, cluster 11.
And the entry,
the directory entry right here or
the fat file table entry for
cluster 12 shows that it is occupied and
it shows it has an end of file marker So
we know the file that is occupying.
Cluster 12 only takes
up one cluster because
there's no pointer to the next cluster so
now I'm going to go back
to file Preferences.
I'm going to change my view
from four back to 16 and
I'm going to say okay so
we've created a file,
we've looked at the data,
we've looked at the root
directory and
we've looked at the fat table.
So now we're going to go ahead and
bring up file explorer again and
I am going to delete,
I'm going to right click and
shift delete to leave me.
It's going to ask me if I want to
permanently delete it and I'm going to say
okay and now from the view of the file
system that file is no longer exists.
So let's bring up active
disk editor again,
let's close our volume and
reload it once our
volume reloads let's navigate
to the root directory.
So we're going to use
the navigate button and
we're going to go to the root
directory of our volume now make
sure we change our template
view too fat directory entry.
Now we're going to scroll down and
we're going to find the short file entry,
short file name entry for the file was
just deleted which was delete me dot txt.
And we can see it down here
at the very bottom and
we look above it,
we can see our long file name entry and
we can see the file name to lead me txt.
Now we need to change this Hexi decimal E
five to the first letter of the file name.
Now because we have
the long file name entry,
we know the first letter of the file name
because of the long file name entry,
the first bite has changed the five but
that's our status bite.
That's what tells us our sequence
number of our long file entry and
it also indicates when we've reached
the last long file name entry for
that file name, directory entry.
So we need to go into edit mode, so
we're going to go up to our menu bar
I'm going to click edit and down here,
you see allow edit content.
We're going to check that
now just know that you would
not do this on real evidence,
you would do this.
If you made a copy of your image,
your working copy and
you would work off of that,
it would be a copy of a copy,
never the original evidence and never
your only copy of the original evidence.
Remember this is a short file name alias
so it has to be a capital letter even
though I named it with a small d,
it still has to be a capital letter here.
So we're going to go to the ask E and
write a capital d,
capital D and lower case d are not
the same packs a decimal E.
You would have to look that up in an a ski
chart to find out what a capital D is but
you're able to right in
the ass key capital D and
it'll automatically write
the correct text value for that.
Now our long file name entry, let's take
a look, we look at the attribute bite and
it is a long file name entry and
we can see the long file name.
An ASCII tests off at the right,
just to make sure that's our last one,
let's look again at offset 0B,
of the file entry above it,
the file directory entry and
we don't see, a 0F.
A hexidecimal 0F so we know,
that is not a long file name entry.
So we know we need to change our E5 for
indicating the last long file
name entry in the directory
set in one because it's
also the first one so 41.
So we've changed our
directory entries which was
the first step recovering our file.
Now, let's take a look at the short file
name directory entry, so go ahead and
set your template position, We want to
know the starting cluster and
the size of the file.
Starting cluster is 12, and
the size of the file, is 27 bytes.
We know from our volume boot record,
that our cluster size was two
sectors which would be 1024 bytes,
so we know we're only going to need one
cluster to write this 27 byte file.
And we know we need to go
out to cluster 12, and
show it as allocated in the end of file.
So now let's navigate to the FATs,
let's navigate to FAT one,
let's change our view to make this easier.
So File > Preferences,
change this to four bytes per line,
click OK, and
now let's take a look at our FAT table.
We have our media descriptor
right here at the top,
which is the first four byte entry.
The second four byte entery in the FAT
table is going to be the FAT type
indicator, which shows us it's
FF FF FF which indicates FAT32.
Our next entry in our FAT table
is going to show us the entry for
cluster two,
because we start at cluster two.
And cluster too has an end of file
marker as we move down to cluster 3,
we're going to move down to cluster 4,
5 cluster 6, cluster 7,
cluster 8, cluster 9,
cluster 10, cluster 11,
cluster 12,
this is where we want to be cluster 12.
because it was 0C and
0C in hex would be 12, so
we need to put an end
of file marker in here.
So we're going to simply type FF, FF, FF,
0F, so
we're going to go over to Edit now, and
get out of edit mode so
uncheck, Allow Edit Content.
Now we're also going to go
to File > Preferences and
go back to 16 Bytes per line.
The last thing we're going to do is
we're going to go to go to Sector,
And we're going to go to cluster 12, so
we're going to type in hex 0X
to indicate hex and then 0C and
we're going to click Enter, and
we can see our data is out on the drive.
So now if I went to browser and
then went to File Preview,
I'd be able to see my data here.
Close this we have to close
active disk editor in order for
it to save the changes.
So we're going to close the drive first,
so we close the drive and
it's going to ask us you've
modified this drive,
do you want to save the changes and
we're going to say yes.
Now go ahead and close active this editor,
now we're going to bring
up file explorer again.
And when we refresh it,
we see our deleteme.txt is
in the file explorer and
we double click on it,
we can see then it comes
up, This is a doc I will delete.
So we have completely
recovered deleteme.txt and
we followed the steps,
we fixed the root directory entries,
we changed the hexi decimal E5 back
to the first letter of the file name.
Because we knew the first letter of the
file name because it had a long file name
entry and we were able to see
the D in the long file name entry.
And then we were able to retain
the short file name entry,
because we changed the hexi five to a D.
And in the long file name entry,
we changed the status byte
to a 4 indicating it was
the last one in the sequence and
a 1, because it was also
the first long file name entry.
And we verified that that long file
name entry belonged to that file.
That takes us to the end of our FAT
file course in our next course,
we're going to be talking
about the NTFS file system.